--- PAGE 1 ---
Syllabus
Cambridge International
AS & A Level
Computer Science 9618
Use this syllabus for exams in 2026.
Exams are available in the June and November series.
Version 2
For the purposes of screen readers, any mention in this document of Cambridge IGCSE
refers to Cambridge International General Certificate of Secondary Education.
--- PAGE 2 ---
Why choose Cambridge International?
Cambridge International prepares school students for life, helping them develop an informed curiosity and a
lasting passion for learning. We are part of the University of Cambridge.
Our Cambridge Pathway gives students a clear path for educational success from age 5 to 19. Schools can
shape the curriculum around how they want students to learn – with a wide range of subjects and flexible ways
to offer them. It helps students discover new abilities and a wider world, and gives them the skills they need for
life, so they can achieve at school, university and work.
Our programmes and qualifications set the global standard for international education. They are created by
subject experts, are rooted in academic rigour and reflect the latest educational research. They provide a
strong platform for students to progress from one stage to the next, and are well supported by teaching and
learning resources. Learn more about our research at www.cambridgeassessment.org.uk/our-research/
We review all our syllabuses regularly, so they reflect the latest research evidence and professional teaching
practice – and take account of the different national contexts in which they are taught.
We consult with teachers to help us design each syllabus around the needs of their learners. Consulting with
leading universities has helped us make sure our syllabuses encourage students to master the key concepts in
the subject and develop the skills necessary for success in higher education.
We believe education works best when curriculum, teaching, learning and assessment are closely aligned.
Our programmes develop deep knowledge, conceptual understanding and higher-order thinking skills, to
prepare students for their future. Together with schools, we develop Cambridge learners who are confident,
responsible, reflective, innovative and engaged – equipped for success in the modern world.
Every year, nearly a million Cambridge students from 10 000 schools in 160 countries prepare for their future
with the Cambridge Pathway.
School feedback: ‘We think the Cambridge curriculum is superb preparation for university.’
Feedback from: Christoph Guttentag, Dean of Undergraduate Admissions, Duke University, USA
Quality management
Cambridge International is committed to providing exceptional quality. In line with this commitment, our
quality management system for the provision of international education programmes and qualifications
programmes for students aged 5 to 19 is independently certified as meeting the internationally recognised
standard, ISO 9001:2015. Learn more at www.cambridgeinternational.org/about-us/our-standards/
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment September 2023
Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of Cambridge University Press & Assessment. Cambridge University Press &
Assessment is a department of the University of Cambridge.
Cambridge University Press & Assessment retains the copyright on all its publications. Registered centres are permitted to copy
material from this booklet for their own internal use. However, we cannot give permission to centres to photocopy any material that is
acknowledged to a third party even for internal use within a centre.
--- PAGE 3 ---
Contents
Why choose Cambridge International? ........................................................................2
1 Why choose this syllabus? ........................................................................................4
2 Syllabus overview .......................................................................................................8
Aims 8
Content overview 9
Assessment overview 11
Assessment objectives 13
3 Subject content .........................................................................................................14
AS content 14
A Level content 32
Teacher guidance 39
4 Details of the assessment .......................................................................................40
Submission of Paper 4 Practical 40
Command words 41
5 What else you need to know ...................................................................................43
Before you start 43
Making entries 44
Accessibility and equality 44
After the exam 45
How students, teachers and higher education can use the grades 47
Changes to this syllabus for 2026 48
Important: Changes to this syllabus
For information about changes to this syllabus for 2026, go to page 48.
The latest syllabus is version 2, published December 2025. There are no significant changes which affect
teaching.
Any textbooks endorsed to support the syllabus for examination from 2021 are still suitable for use with this
syllabus.
--- PAGE 4 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026.
1 Why choose this syllabus?
Key benefits
The best motivation for a student is a real passion for the
subject they are learning. By offering students a variety of
Cambridge International AS & A Levels, you can give them the
greatest chance of finding the path of education they most
want to follow. With over 50 subjects to choose from, students
can select the ones they love and that they are best at, which
Cambridge
helps motivate them throughout their studies.
learner
Following a Cambridge International AS & A Level programme
helps students develop abilities which universities value highly,
including:
• a deep understanding of their subjects
• higher order thinking skills – analysis, critical thinking,
problem solving
• presenting ordered and coherent arguments
• independent learning and research.
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science encourages learners to meet the needs of
Higher Education courses in computer science as well as twenty-first century digital employers. It encourages
learners to think creatively, through applying practical programming solutions, demonstrating that they are
effective users of technology.
Our approach in Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science encourages learners to be:
confident, using a range of technology and programming paradigms
responsible, using technology ethically
reflective, as programmers, improving their own programming solution
innovative, creating efficient solutions to problems
engaged, in technology, how it is built and how software solutions are developed.
School feedback: ‘Cambridge students develop a deep understanding of subjects and
independent thinking skills.’
Feedback from: Principal, Rockledge High School, USA
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 4
--- PAGE 5 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Why choose this syllabus?
Key concepts
Key concepts are essential ideas that help students develop a deep understanding of their subject and make
links between different aspects. Key concepts may open up new ways of thinking about, understanding or
interpreting the important things to be learned.
Good teaching and learning will incorporate and reinforce a subject’s key concepts to help students gain:
• a greater depth as well as breadth of subject knowledge
• confidence, especially in applying knowledge and skills in new situations
• the vocabulary to discuss their subject conceptually and show how different aspects link together
• a level of mastery of their subject to help them enter higher education.
The key concepts identified below, carefully introduced and developed, will help to underpin the course you will
teach. You may identify additional key concepts which will also enrich teaching and learning.
The key concepts for Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science are:
• Computational thinking
Computational thinking is a set of fundamental skills that help produce a solution to a problem. Skills such
as abstraction, decomposition and algorithmic thinking are used to study a problem and design a solution
that can be implemented. This may involve using a range of technologies and programming languages.
• Programming paradigms
A programming paradigm is a way of thinking about or approaching problems. There are many different
programming styles that can be used, which are suited to unique functions, tools and specific situations.
An understanding of programming paradigms is essential to ensure they are used appropriately, when
designing and building programs.
• Communication
Communication is a core requirement of computer systems. It includes the ability to transfer data from one
device or component to another and an understanding of the rules and methods that are used in this data
transfer. Communication could range from the internal transfer of data within a computer system, to the
transfer of a video across the internet.
• Computer architecture and hardware
Computer architecture is the design of the internal operation of a computer system. It includes the rules that
dictate how components and data are organised, how data are communicated between components, to
allow hardware to function. There is a range of architectures, with different components and rules, that are
appropriate for different scenarios.
All computers comprise of a combination of hardware components, ranging from internal components,
such as the Central Processing Unit (CPU) and main memory, to peripherals. To produce effective
and efficient programs to run on hardware, it is important to understand how the components work
independently and together to produce a system that can be used. Hardware needs software to be able
to perform a task. Software allows hardware to become functional. This enables the user to communicate
with the hardware to perform tasks.
• Data representation and structures
Computers use binary and understanding how a binary number can be interpreted in many different ways
is important. Programming requires an understanding of how data can be organised for efficient access
and/or transfer.
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 5
--- PAGE 6 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Why choose this syllabus?
International recognition and acceptance
Our expertise in curriculum, teaching and learning, and assessment is the basis for the recognition of
our programmes and qualifications around the world. Every year thousands of students with Cambridge
International AS & A Levels gain places at leading universities worldwide. Our programmes and qualifications
are valued by top universities around the world including those in the UK, US (including Ivy League universities),
Europe, Australia, Canada and New Zealand.
UK ENIC, the national agency in the UK for the recognition and comparison of international qualifications and
skills, has carried out an independent benchmarking study of Cambridge International AS & A Level and found
it to be comparable to the standard of AS & A Level in the UK. This means students can be confident that their
Cambridge International AS & A Level qualifications are accepted as equivalent, grade for grade, to UK AS & A
Levels by leading universities worldwide.
Cambridge International AS Level Computer Science makes up the first half of the Cambridge International
A Level course in Computer Science and provides a foundation for the study of Computer Science at
Cambridge International A Level. The AS Level can also be delivered as a standalone qualification. Depending
on local university entrance requirements, students may be able to use it to progress directly to university
courses in Computer Science or some other subjects. It is also suitable as part of a course of general
education.
Cambridge International A Level Computer Science provides a foundation for the study of Computer Science or
related courses in higher education. Equally it is suitable as part of a course of general education.
For more information about the relationship between the Cambridge International AS Level and Cambridge
International A Level see the ‘Assessment overview’ section of the Syllabus overview.
We recommend learners check the Cambridge recognition database and university websites to find the most
up-to-date entry requirements for courses they wish to study.
Learn more at www.cambridgeinternational.org/recognition
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 6
--- PAGE 7 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Why choose this syllabus?
Supporting teachers
We believe education is most effective when curriculum, teaching and learning, and assessment are closely
aligned. We provide a wide range of resources, detailed guidance, innovative training and targeted professional
development so that you can give your students the best possible preparation for Cambridge International
AS & A Level. To find out which resources are available for each syllabus go to
www.cambridgeinternational.org/support
The School Support Hub is our secure online site for Cambridge teachers where you can find the resources
you need to deliver our programmes. You can also keep up to date with your subject and the global Cambridge
community through our online discussion forums.
Find out more at www.cambridgeinternational.org/support
Support for Cambridge International AS & A Level
Planning and Teaching and Learning and revision Results
preparation assessment • Example candidate • Candidate Results
• Syllabuses • Endorsed resources responses Service
• Schemes of work • Online forums • Past papers and • Principal examiner
• Specimen Question mark schemes reports for teachers
Papers and Mark
Schemes
• Teacher guides
Sign up for email notifications about changes to syllabuses, including new and revised products and services,
at www.cambridgeinternational.org/syllabusupdates
Syllabuses and specimen materials represent the final authority on the content and structure of all of our
assessments.
Professional development
Find the next step on your professional development journey.
• Introductory Professional Development – An introduction to Cambridge programmes and qualifications.
• Extension Professional Development – Develop your understanding of Cambridge programmes and
qualifications to build confidence in your delivery.
• Enrichment Professional Development – Transform your approach to teaching with our Enrichment
workshops.
• Cambridge Professional Development Qualifications (PDQs) – Practice-based programmes that transform
professional learning for practising teachers. Available at Certificate and Diploma level.
Find out more at:
www.cambridgeinternational.org/support-and-training-for-schools/professional-development/
Supporting exams officers
We provide comprehensive support and guidance for all Cambridge exams officers.
Find out more at: www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 7
--- PAGE 8 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026.
2 Syllabus overview
Aims
The aims describe the purposes of a course based on this syllabus.
The aims of this course are to enable students to develop:
• computational thinking skills
• an understanding of the main principles of solving problems using computers
• an understanding of the component parts of computer systems and how they interrelate, including
software, data, hardware, communication and people
• an understanding of the different methods of communication and the functionality of networks and the
internet
• the skills necessary to apply this understanding to develop computer based solutions to problems.
Cambridge Assessment International Education is an education organisation and politically
neutral. The contents of this syllabus, examination papers and associated materials do not endorse any
political view. We endeavour to treat all aspects of the exam process neutrally.
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 8
--- PAGE 9 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Syllabus overview
Content overview
AS Level content
1 Information representation 1.1 Data Representation
1.2 Multimedia – Graphics, Sound
1.3 Compression
2 Communication 2.1 Networks including the internet
3 Hardware 3.1 Computers and their components
3.2 Logic Gates and Logic Circuits
4 Processor Fundamentals 4.1 Central Processing Unit (CPU) Architecture
4.2 Assembly Language
4.3 Bit manipulation
5 System Software 5.1 Operating Systems
5.2 Language Translators
6 Security, privacy and data integrity 6.1 Data Security
6.2 Data Integrity
7 Ethics and Ownership 7.1 Ethics and Ownership
8 Databases 8.1 Database Concepts
8.2 Database Management Systems (DBMS)
8.3 Data Definition Language (DDL) and Data
Manipulation Language (DML)
9 Algorithm Design and Problem-solving 9.1 Computational Thinking Skills
9.2 Algorithms
10 Data Types and Structures 10.1 Data Types and Records
10.2 Arrays
10.3 Files
10.4 Introduction to Abstract Data Types (ADT)
11 Programming 11.1 Programming Basics
11.2 Constructs
11.3 Structured Programming
12 Software Development 12.1 Program Development Life cycle
12.2 Program Design
12.3 Program Testing and Maintenance
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 9
--- PAGE 10 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Syllabus overview
A Level content
13 Data Representation 13.1 User-defined data types
13.2 File organisation and access
13.3 Floating-point numbers, representation and
manipulation
14 Communication and internet 14.1 Protocols
technologies 14.2 Circuit switching, packet switching
15 Hardware and Virtual Machines 15.1 Processors, Parallel Processing and Virtual Machines
15.2 Boolean Algebra and Logic Circuits
16 System Software 16.1 Purposes of an Operating System (OS)
16.2 Translation Software
17 Security 17.1 Encryption, Encryption Protocols and Digital
certificates
18 Artificial Intelligence (AI) 18.1 Artificial Intelligence
19 Computational thinking and 19.1 Algorithms
Problem-solving 19.2 Recursion
20 Further Programming 20.1 Programming Paradigms
20.2 File Processing and Exception Handling
School feedback: ‘Cambridge International AS & A Levels prepare students well for university
because they’ve learnt to go into a subject in considerable depth. There’s that ability to really
understand the depth and richness and the detail of a subject. It’s a wonderful preparation for
what they are going to face at university.’
Feedback from: US Higher Education Advisory Council
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 10
--- PAGE 11 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Syllabus overview
Assessment overview
At AS Level candidates take papers 1 and 2. At A Level candidates take all four papers. Calculators must not
be used in any paper.
Paper 1 Paper 3
Theory Fundamentals 1 hour 30 minutes Advanced Theory 1 hour 30 minutes
75 marks 75 marks
Paper 1 will assess sections 1 to 8 of the Paper 3 will assess sections 13 to 20 of the
syllabus content. syllabus content.
Written paper. Written paper.
Externally assessed. Candidates answer all Externally assessed. Candidates answer all
questions. questions.
50% of the AS Level 25% of the A Level
25% of the A Level
Paper 2 Paper 4
Fundamental Problem-solving and 2 hours Practical 2 hours 30 minutes
Programming Skills 75 marks
75 marks Paper 4 will assess sections 19 to 20 of the
Paper 2 will assess sections 9 to 12 of the syllabus content, except for low-level and
syllabus content. declarative programming.
Candidates will need to write answers in Candidates will submit complete program code
pseudocode. and evidence of testing.
Written paper. Candidates will be required to use either Java
Externally assessed. Candidates answer all (console mode), Visual Basic* (console mode) or
questions. Python (console mode) programming languages.
50% of the AS Level Externally assessed. Candidates answer all
questions on a computer without internet or
25% of the A Level
email facility.
25% of the A Level
Information on availability is in the Before you start section.
* Visual Basic in this syllabus refers to any .Net versions of the Visual Basic programming language. Candidates
are asked to use one of these versions of the software and not Visual Basic 6.0 or earlier versions of this
programming language.
Check the samples database at www.cambridgeinternational.org/samples for submission information,
forms and deadlines for Component 4.
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 11
--- PAGE 12 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Syllabus overview
There are three routes for Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science:
Route Paper 1 Paper 2 Paper 3 Paper 4
1 AS Level only
(Candidates take all AS yes yes no no
components in the same exam
series)
2 A Level (staged over two years)
Year 1 AS Level* yes yes no no
Year 2 Complete the A Level no no yes yes
3 A Level
(Candidates take all components in yes yes yes yes
the same exam series)
* Candidates carry forward their AS Level result subject to the rules and time limits described in the Cambridge
Handbook. See Making entries for more information on carry forward of results.
Candidates following an AS Level route are eligible for grades a–e. Candidates following an A Level route are
eligible for grades A*–E.
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 12
--- PAGE 13 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Syllabus overview
Assessment objectives
The assessment objectives (AOs) are:
AO1
Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the principles and concepts of computer science, including
abstraction, logic, algorithms and data representation.
AO2
Apply knowledge and understanding of the principles and concepts of computer science, including to analyse
problems in computational terms.
AO3
Design, program and evaluate computer systems to solve problems, making reasoned judgements about
these.
Weighting for assessment objectives
The approximate weightings allocated to each of the assessment objectives (AOs) are summarised below.
Assessment objectives as a percentage of each qualification
Assessment objective Weighting in AS Level % Weighting in A Level %
AO1 30 30
AO2 40 30
AO3 30 40
Total 100 100
Assessment objectives as a percentage of each component
Assessment objective Weighting in components %
Paper 1 Paper 2 Paper 3 Paper 4
AO1 60 0 60 0
AO2 40 40 40 0
AO3 0 60 0 100
Total 100 100 100 100
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 13
--- PAGE 14 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026.
3 Subject content
This syllabus gives you the flexibility to design a course that will interest, challenge and engage your learners.
Where appropriate you are responsible for selecting resources and examples to support your learners’
study. These should be appropriate for the learners’ age, cultural background and learning context as well as
complying with your school policies and local legal requirements.
AS content
Computational thinking is developed using a structured approach that includes the use of programming and
problem-solving skills to provide solutions to real life problems. It requires the manipulation and storage of
different types of data and the communication of solutions over networks.
Computational thinking is supported by developing an understanding of how computer architecture, hardware,
systems software, security measures and communication systems, provide the infrastructure required in
an efficient and ethical way. The syllabus supports opportunities for students to apply their skills in practical
contexts that are required in the digital industry.
1 Information representation
1.1 Data Representation
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of binary magnitudes and the Understand the difference between and use:
difference between binary prefixes and decimal
• kibi and kilo
prefixes
• mebi and mega
• gibi and giga
• tebi and tera
Show understanding of different number systems Use the binary, denary, hexadecimal number
bases and Binary Coded Decimal (BCD) and one’s
and two’s complement representation for binary
numbers
Convert an integer value from one number base/
representation to another
Perform binary addition and subtraction Using positive and negative binary integers
Show understanding of how overflow can occur
Describe practical applications where Binary Coded
Decimal (BCD) and Hexadecimal are used
Show understanding of and be able to represent Students are expected to be familiar with ASCII
character data in its internal binary form, depending (American Standard Code for Information
on the character set used Interchange), extended ASCII and Unicode.
Students will not be expected to memorise any
particular character codes
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 14
--- PAGE 15 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
1.2 Multimedia
Graphics
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of how data for a bitmapped Use and understand the terms: pixel, file header,
image are encoded image resolution, screen resolution, colour depth/
bit depth
Perform calculations to estimate the file size for a
bitmap image
Show understanding of the effects of changing Use the terms: image resolution, colour depth /
elements of a bitmap image on the image quality bit depth
and file size
Show understanding of how data for a vector Use the terms: drawing object, property, drawing list
graphic are encoded
Justify the use of a bitmap image or a vector
graphic for a given task
Sound
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of how sound is represented Use the terms: sampling, sampling rate, sampling
and encoded resolution, analogue and digital data
Show understanding of the impact of changing the Including the impact on file size and accuracy
sampling rate and resolution
1.3 Compression
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of the need for and examples
of the use of compression
Show understanding of lossy and lossless
compression and justify the use of a method in a
given situation
Show understanding of how a text file, bitmap Including the use of run-length encoding (RLE)
image, vector graphic and sound file can be
compressed
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 15
--- PAGE 16 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
2 Communication
2.1 Networks including the internet
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of the purpose and benefits of
networking devices
Show understanding of the characteristics of a LAN
(local area network) and a WAN (wide area network)
Explain the client-server and peer-to-peer models of Roles of the different computers within the network
networked computers and subnetwork models
Benefits and drawbacks of each model
Justify the use of a model for a given situation
Show understanding of thin-client and thick-client
and the differences between them
Show understanding of the bus, star, mesh and Understand how packets are transmitted between
hybrid topologies two hosts for a given topology
Justify the use of a topology for a given situation
Show understanding of cloud computing Including the use of public and private clouds
Benefits and drawbacks of cloud computing
Show understanding of the differences between Describe the characteristics of copper cable,
and implications of the use of wireless and wired fibre-optic cable, radio waves (including WiFi),
networks microwaves, satellites
Describe the hardware that is used to support a Including switch, server, Network Interface Card
LAN (NIC), Wireless Network Interface Card (WNIC),
Wireless Access Points (WAP), cables, bridge,
repeater
Describe the role and function of a router in a
network
Show understanding of Ethernet and how collisions Including Carrier Sense Multiple Access / Collision
are detected and avoided Detection (CSMA / CD)
Show understanding of bit streaming Methods of bit streaming, i.e. real-time and
on-demand
Importance of bit rates broadband speed on bit
streaming
Show understanding of the differences between the
World Wide Web (WWW) and the internet
Describe the hardware that is used to support the Including modems, PSTN (Public Switched
internet Telephone Network), dedicated lines, cell phone
network
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 16
--- PAGE 17 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
2.1 Networks including the internet continued
Explain the use of IP addresses in the transmission Including:
of data over the internet
• format of an IP address including IPv4 and IPv6
• use of subnetting in a network
• how an IP address is associated with a device
on a network
• difference between a public IP address and
a private IP address and the implications for
security
• difference between a static IP address and a
dynamic IP address
Explain how a Uniform Resource Locator (URL) is
used to locate a resource on the World Wide Web
(WWW) and the role of the Domain Name Service
(DNS)
3 Hardware
3.1 Computers and their components
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of the need for input, output,
primary memory and secondary (including
removable) storage
Show understanding of embedded systems Including: benefits and drawbacks of embedded
systems
Describe the principal operations of hardware Including: Laser printer, 3D printer, microphone,
devices speakers, magnetic hard disk, solid state (flash)
memory, optical disc reader/writer, touchscreen,
virtual reality headset
Show understanding of the use of buffers
Explain the differences between Random Access Including their use in a range of devices and
Memory (RAM) and Read Only Memory (ROM) systems
Explain the differences between Static RAM (SRAM) Including the use of SRAM and DRAM in a range of
and Dynamic RAM (DRAM) devices and systems and the reasons for using one
instead of the other depending on the device and its
use
Explain the difference between Programmable ROM
(PROM), Erasable Programmable ROM (EPROM)
and Electrically Erasable Programmable ROM
(EEPROM)
Show an understanding of monitoring and control Including:
systems
• difference between monitoring and control
• use of sensors (including temperature, pressure,
infra-red, sound) and actuators
• importance of feedback
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 17
--- PAGE 18 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
3.2 Logic Gates and Logic Circuits
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Use the following logic gate symbols:
NOT AND OR
NAND NOR XOR
Understand and define the functions of : All gates except the NOT gate will have two inputs
NOT, AND, OR, NAND, NOR and XOR (EOR) gates only.
Construct the truth table for each of the logic gates
above
Construct a logic circuit From:
• a problem statement
• a logic expression
• a truth table
Construct a truth table From:
• a problem statement
• a logic circuit
• a logic expression
Construct a logic expression From:
• a problem statement
• a logic circuit
• a truth table
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 18
--- PAGE 19 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
4 Processor Fundamentals
4.1 Central Processing Unit (CPU) Architecture
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of the basic Von Neumann
model for a computer system and the stored
program concept
Show understanding of the purpose and role of Special purpose registers including:
registers, including the difference between general
• Program Counter (PC)
purpose and special purpose registers
• Memory Data Register (MDR)
• Memory Address Register (MAR)
• The Accumulator (ACC)
• Index Register (IX)
• Current Instruction Register (CIR)
• Status Register
Show understanding of the purpose and roles of the
Arithmetic and Logic Unit (ALU), Control Unit (CU)
and system clock, Immediate Access Store (IAS)
Show understanding of how data are transferred
between various components of the computer
system using the address bus, data bus and control
bus
Show understanding of how factors contribute to Including:
the performance of the computer system
• processor type and number of cores
• the bus width
• clock speed
• cache memory
Understand how different ports provide connection Including connection to:
to peripheral devices
• Universal Serial Bus (USB)
• High Definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI)
• Video Graphics Array (VGA)
Describe the stages of the Fetch-Execute (F-E) cycle Describe and use ‘register transfer’ notation to
describe the F-E cycle
Show understanding of the purpose of interrupts Including:
• possible causes of interrupts
• applications of interrupts
• use of an Interrupt Service handling Routine
(ISR)
• when interrupts are detected during the fetch-
execute cycle
• how interrupts are handled
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 19
--- PAGE 20 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
4.2 Assembly Language
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of the relationship between
assembly language and machine code
Describe the different stages of the assembly Apply the two-pass assembler process to a given
process for a two-pass assembler simple assembly language program
Trace a given simple assembly language program
Show understanding that a set of instructions are Including the following groups:
grouped
• Data movement
• Input and output of data
• Arithmetic operations
• Unconditional and conditional instructions
• Compare instructions
Show understanding of and be able to use different Including immediate, direct, indirect, indexed,
modes of addressing relative
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 20
--- PAGE 21 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
The following table is an example of an instruction set:
Instruction Explanation
Opcode Operand
Immediate addressing. Load the number n to ACC
LDM #n
Direct addressing. Load the contents of the location at the given address
LDD <address>
to ACC
Indirect addressing. The address to be used is at the given address.
LDI <address>
Load the contents of this second address to ACC
Indexed addressing. Form the address from <address> + the contents of
LDX <address>
the index register. Copy the contents of this calculated address to ACC
Immediate addressing. Load the number n to IX
LDR #n
Move the contents of the accumulator to the given register (IX)
MOV <register>
Store the contents of ACC at the given address
STO <address>
Add the contents of the given address to the ACC
ADD <address>
Add the number n to the ACC
ADD #n/Bn/&n
Subtract the contents of the given address from the ACC
SUB <address>
Subtract the number n from the ACC
SUB #n/Bn/&n
Add 1 to the contents of the register (ACC or IX)
INC <register>
Subtract 1 from the contents of the register (ACC or IX)
DEC <register>
Jump to the given address
JMP <address>
Compare the contents of ACC with the contents of <address>
CMP <address>
Compare the contents of ACC with number n
CMP #n
Indirect addressing. The address to be used is at the given address.
CMI <address>
Compare the contents of ACC with the contents of this second address
Following a compare instruction, jump to <address> if the compare was
JPE <address>
True
Following a compare instruction, jump to <address> if the compare was
JPN <address>
False
Key in a character and store its ASCII value in ACC
IN
Output to the screen the character whose ASCII value is stored in ACC
OUT
Return control to the operating system
END
All questions will assume there is only one general purpose register available (Accumulator)
ACC denotes Accumulator
IX denotes Index Register
<address> can be an absolute or symbolic address
# denotes a denary number, e.g. #123
B denotes a binary number, e.g. B01001010
& denotes a hexadecimal number, e.g. &4A
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 21
--- PAGE 22 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
4.3 Bit manipulation
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of and perform binary shifts Logical, arithmetic and cyclic
Left shift, right shift
Show understanding of how bit manipulation can be Carry out bit manipulation operations
used to monitor/control a device Test and set a bit (using bit masking)
Instruction
Label Opcode Operand Explanation
Bitwise AND operation of the contents of ACC with the
AND #n / Bn / &n
operand
Bitwise AND operation of the contents of ACC with the
AND <address>
contents of <address>
Bitwise XOR operation of the contents of ACC with the
XOR #n / Bn / &n
operand
Bitwise XOR operation of the contents of ACC with the
XOR <address>
contents of <address>
Bitwise OR operation of the contents of ACC with the
OR #n / Bn / &n
operand
Bitwise OR operation of the contents of ACC with the
OR <address>
contents of <address>
Bits in ACC are shifted logically n places to the left. Zeros are
LSL #n
introduced on the right hand end
Bits in ACC are shifted logically n places to the right. Zeros
LSR #n
are introduced on the left hand end
Labels an instruction
<label>: <opcode> <operand>
Gives a symbolic address <label> to the memory location
<label>: <data>
with contents <data>
All questions will assume there is only one general purpose register available (Accumulator)
ACC denotes Accumulator
IX denotes Index Register
<address> can be an absolute or symbolic address
# denotes a denary number, e.g. #123
B denotes a binary number, e.g. B01001010
& denotes a hexadecimal number, e.g. &4A
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 22
--- PAGE 23 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
5 System Software
5.1 Operating Systems
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Explain why a computer system requires an
Operating System (OS)
Explain the key management tasks carried out by Including memory management, file management,
the Operating System security management, hardware management
(input / output / peripherals), process management
Show understanding of the need for typical utility Including disk formatter, virus checker,
software provided with an Operating System defragmentation software, disk contents analysis/
disk repair software, file compression, back-up
software
Show understanding of program libraries Including:
• software under development is often
constructed using existing code from program
libraries
• the benefits to the developer of software
constructed using library files, including
Dynamic Link Library (DLL) files
5.2 Language Translators
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of the need for:
• assembler software for the translation of an
assembly language program
• a compiler for the translation of a high-level
language program
• an interpreter for translation and execution of a
high-level language program
Explain the benefits and drawbacks of using either a
compiler or interpreter and justify the use of each
Show awareness that high-level language programs
may be partially compiled and partially interpreted,
such as Java (console mode)
Describe features found in a typical Integrated Including:
Development Environment (IDE)
• for coding, including context-sensitive prompts
• for initial error detection, including dynamic
syntax checks
• for presentation, including prettyprint, expand
and collapse code blocks
• for debugging, including single stepping,
breakpoints, i.e. variables, expressions, report
window
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 23
--- PAGE 24 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
6 Security, privacy and data integrity
6.1 Data Security
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Explain the difference between the terms security,
privacy and integrity of data
Show appreciation of the need for both the security
of data and the security of the computer system
Describe security measures designed to protect Including user accounts, passwords, authentication
computer systems, ranging from the stand-alone techniques such as digital signatures and
PC to a network of computers biometrics, firewall, anti-virus software, anti-
spyware, encryption
Show understanding of the threats to computer and Including malware (virus, spyware), hackers,
data security posed by networks and the internet phishing, pharming
Describe methods that can be used to restrict the
risks posed by threats
Describe security methods designed to protect the Including encryption, access rights
security of data
6.2 Data Integrity
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Describe how data validation and data verification
help protect the integrity of data
Describe and use methods of data validation Including range check, format check, length check,
presence check, existence check, limit check,
check digit
Describe and use methods of data verification During data entry including visual check, double
during data entry and data transfer entry
During data transfer including parity check (byte and
block), checksum
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 24
--- PAGE 25 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
7 Ethics and Ownership
7.1 Ethics and Ownership
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of the need for and purpose of Understand the importance of joining a professional
ethics as a computing professional ethical body including BCS (British Computer
Society), IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers)
Show understanding of the need to act ethically and
the impact of acting ethically or unethically for a
given situation
Show understanding of the need for copyright
legislation
Show understanding of the different types of Licences to include free Software Foundation, the
software licencing and justify the use of a licence for Open Source Initiative, shareware and commercial
a given situation software
Show understanding of Artificial Intelligence (AI) Understand the impact of AI including social,
economic and environmental issues
Understand the applications of AI
8 Databases
8.1 Database Concepts
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of the limitations of using a file-
based approach for the storage and retrieval of data
Describe the features of a relational database that
address the limitations of a file-based approach
Show understanding of and use the terminology Including entity, table, record, field, tuple, attribute,
associated with a relational database model primary key, candidate key, secondary key, foreign
key, relationship (one-to-many, one-to-one, many-
to-many), referential integrity, indexing
Use an entity-relationship (E-R) diagram to
document a database design
Show understanding of the normalisation process First Normal Form (1NF),
Second Normal Form (2NF) and
Third Normal Form (3NF)
Explain why a given set of database tables are, or
are not, in 3NF
Produce a normalised database design for a
description of a database, a given set of data, or a
given set of tables
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 25
--- PAGE 26 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
8.2 Database Management Systems (DBMS)
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of the features provided by Including:
a Database Management System (DBMS) that
• data management, including maintaining a data
address the issues of a file based approach
dictionary
• data modelling
• logical schema
• data integrity
• data security, including backup procedures and
the use of access rights to individuals / groups
of users
Show understanding of how software tools found Including the use and purpose of:
within a DBMS are used in practice
• developer interface
• query processor
8.3 Data Definition Language (DDL) and Data Manipulation Language (DML)
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding that the DBMS carries out
all creation / modification of the database structure
using its Data Definition Language (DDL)
Show understanding that the DBMS carries out all
queries and maintenance of data using its DML
Show understanding that the industry standard for Understand a given SQL statement
both DDL and DML is Structured Query Language
(SQL)
Understand given SQL (DDL) statements and be Create a database (CREATE DATABASE)
able to write simple SQL (DDL) statements using a Create a table definition (CREATE TABLE), including
sub-set of statements the creation of attributes with appropriate data
types:
• CHARACTER
• VARCHAR(n)
• BOOLEAN
• INTEGER
• REAL
• DATE
• TIME
change a table definition (ALTER TABLE)
add a primary key to a table (PRIMARY KEY (field))
add a foreign key to a table (FOREIGN KEY (field)
REFERENCES Table (Field))
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 26
--- PAGE 27 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
8.3 Data Definition Language (DDL) and Data Manipulation Language (DML) continued
Write an SQL script to query or modify data (DML) Queries including SELECT... FROM, WHERE,
which are stored in (at most two) database tables ORDER BY, GROUP BY, INNER JOIN, SUM,
COUNT, AVG
Data maintenance including. INSERT INTO, DELETE
FROM, UPDATE
9 Algorithm Design and Problem-solving
Refer to Pseudocode Guide www.cambridgeinternational.org/support
9.1 Computational Thinking Skills
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show an understanding of abstraction Need for and benefits of using abstraction
Describe the purpose of abstraction
Produce an abstract model of a system by only
including essential details
Describe and use decomposition Break down problems into sub-problems leading
to the concept of a program module (procedure /
function)
9.2 Algorithms
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding that an algorithm is a solution to
a problem expressed as a sequence of defined steps
Use suitable identifier names for the representation
of data used by a problem and represent these
using an identifier table
Write pseudocode that contains input, process and
output
Write pseudocode using the three basic constructs
of sequence, selection and iteration (repetition)
Document a simple algorithm using a structured
English description, a flowchart or pseudocode
Write pseudocode from:
• a structured English description
• a flowchart
Draw a flowchart from:
• a structured English description
• pseudocode
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 27
--- PAGE 28 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
9.2 Algorithms continued
Describe and use the process of stepwise
refinement to express an algorithm to a level of
detail from which the task may be programmed
Use logic statements to define parts of an algorithm
solution
10 Data Types and Structures
10.1 Data Types and Records
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Select and use appropriate data types for a problem including integer, real, char, string, Boolean, date
solution (pseudocode will use the following data types:
INTEGER, REAL, CHAR, STRING, BOOLEAN,
DATE, ARRAY, FILE)
Show understanding of the purpose of a record Write pseudocode to define a record structure
structure to hold a set of data of different data types Write pseudocode to read data from a record
under one identifier structure and save data to a record structure
10.2 Arrays
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Use the technical terms associated with arrays Including index, upper and lower bound
Select a suitable data structure (1D or 2D array) to
use for a given task
Write pseudocode for 1D and 2D arrays
Write pseudocode to process array data Sort using a bubble sort
Search using a linear search
10.3 Files
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of why files are needed
Write pseudocode to handle text files that consist of
one or more lines
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 28
--- PAGE 29 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
10.4 Introduction to Abstract Data Types (ADT)
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding that an ADT is a collection of
data and a set of operations on those data
Show understanding that a stack, queue and linked Describe the key features of a stack, queue and
list are examples of ADTs linked list and justify their use for a given situation
Use a stack, queue and linked list to store data Candidates will not be required to write pseudocode
for these structures, but they should be able to add,
edit and delete data from these structures
Describe how a queue, stack and linked list can be
implemented using arrays
11 Programming
11.1 Programming Basics
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Implement and write pseudocode from a given
design presented as either a program flowchart or
structured English
Write pseudocode statements for:
• the declaration and initialisation of constants
• the declaration of variables
• the assignment of values to variables
• expressions involving any of the arithmetic or
logical operators input from the keyboard and
output to the console
Use built-in functions and library routines Any functions not given in the pseudocode guide
will be provided
String manipulation functions will always be given
11.2 Constructs
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Use pseudocode to write:
• an ‘IF’ statement including the ‘ELSE’ clause
and nested IF statements
• a ‘CASE’ structure
• a ‘count-controlled’ loop:
• a ‘post-condition’ loop
• a ‘pre-condition’ loop
Justify why one loop structure may be better suited
to solve a problem than the others
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 29
--- PAGE 30 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
11.3 Structured Programming
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Define and use a procedure
Explain where in the construction of an algorithm it
would be appropriate to use a procedure
Use parameters A procedure may have none, one or more
parameters
A parameter can be passed by reference or by value
Define and use a function
Explain where in the construction of an algorithm it A function is used in an expression, e.g. the return
is appropriate to use a function value replaces the call
Use the terminology associated with procedures including procedure / function header, procedure /
and functions function interface, parameter, argument, return value
Write efficient pseudocode
12 Software Development
12.1 Program Development Life cycle
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of the purpose of a
development life cycle
Show understanding of the need for different Including: waterfall, iterative, rapid application
development life cycles depending on the program development (RAD)
being developed
Describe the principles, benefits and drawbacks of
each type of life cycle
Show understanding of the analysis, design, coding,
testing and maintenance stages in the program
development life cycle
12.2 Program Design
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Use a structure chart to decompose a Describe the purpose of a structure chart
problem into sub-tasks and express the Construct a structure chart for a given problem
parameters passed between the various
Derive equivalent pseudocode from a structure
modules / procedures / functions which are part of
chart
the algorithm design
Show understanding of the purpose of
state-transition diagrams to document an algorithm
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 30
--- PAGE 31 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
12.3 Program Testing and Maintenance
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of ways of exposing and
avoiding faults in programs
Locate and identify the different types of errors • syntax errors
• logic errors
• run-time errors
Correct identified errors
Show understanding of the methods of testing Including dry run, walkthrough, white-box, black-
available and select appropriate data for a given box, integration, alpha, beta, acceptance, stub
method
Show understanding of the need for a test strategy
and test plan and their likely contents
Choose appropriate test data for a test plan Including normal, abnormal and extreme/boundary
Show understanding of the need for continuing Including perfective, adaptive, corrective
maintenance of a system and the differences
between each type of maintenance
Analyse an existing program and make
amendments to enhance functionality
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 31
--- PAGE 32 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
A Level content
Computational thinking is further developed at A Level to extend methods for searching, sorting, structuring
and storage of data. This includes understanding of Artificial Intelligence (AI). Programming paradigms are
considered together with an extension of programming skills to include recursion and exception handling.
Computational thinking is supported by developing an in-depth understanding of how computer architecture,
hardware, systems software, security measures and communication systems can have different structures
and protocols. These can be combined to provide an appropriate infrastructure for solutions of problems. The
syllabus encourages opportunities for students to apply their skills in a practical context that are required in the
digital industry.
13 Data Representation
13.1 User-defined data types
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of why user-defined types are
necessary
Define and use non-composite types Including enumerated, pointer
Define and use composite data types Including set, record and class/object
Choose and design an appropriate user-defined
data type for a given problem
13.2 File organisation and access
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of the methods of file Including serial, sequential (using a key field),
organisation and select an appropriate method of random (using a record key)
file organisation and file access for a given problem
Show understanding of methods of file access Including
Sequential access for serial and sequential files
Direct access for sequential and random files
Show understanding of hashing algorithms Describe and use different hashing algorithms to
read from and write data to a random / sequential file
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 32
--- PAGE 33 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
13.3 Floating-point numbers, representation and manipulation
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Describe the format of binary floating-point real Use two’s complement form
numbers Understand of the effects of changing the allocation
of bits to mantissa and exponent in a floating-point
representation
Convert binary floating-point real numbers into
denary and vice versa
Normalise floating-point numbers Understand the reasons for normalisation
Show understanding of the consequences of a Understand how underflow and overflow can occur
binary representation only being an approximation
to the real number it represents (in certain cases)
Show understanding that binary representations
can give rise to rounding errors
14 Communication and internet technologies
14.1 Protocols
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of why a protocol is essential
for communication between computers
Show understanding of how protocol
implementation can be viewed as a stack, where
each layer has its own functionality
Show understanding of the TCP / IP protocol suite Four Layers (Application, Transport, Internet, Link)
Purpose and function of each layer
Application when a message is sent from one host
to another on the internet
Show understanding of protocols (HTTP, FTP, BitTorrent protocol provides peer-to-peer file sharing
POP3, IMAP, SMTP, BitTorrent) and their purposes
14.2 Circuit switching, packet switching
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of circuit switching Benefits, drawbacks and where it is applicable
Show understanding of packet switching Benefits, drawbacks and where it is applicable
Show understanding of the function of a router in
packet switching
Explain how packet switching is used to pass
messages across a network, including the internet
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 33
--- PAGE 34 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
15 Hardware and Virtual Machines
15.1 Processors, Parallel Processing and Virtual Machines
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of Reduced Instruction Set Differences between RISC and CISC
Computers (RISC) and Complex Instruction Set Understand interrupt handling on CISC and RISC
Computers (CISC) processors processors
Show understanding of the importance / use of
pipelining and registers in RISC processors
Show understanding of the four basic computer SISD, SIMD, MISD, MIMD
architectures
Show understanding of the characteristics of
massively parallel computers
Show understanding of the concept of a virtual Give examples of the role of virtual machines
machine Understand the benefits and limitations of virtual
machines
15.2 Boolean Algebra and Logic Circuits
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Produce truth tables for logic circuits including half May include logic gates with more than two inputs
adders and full adders
Show understanding of a flip-flop (SR, JK) Draw a logic circuit and derive a truth table for a
flip-flop
Understand of the role of flip-flops as data storage
elements
Show understanding of Boolean algebra Understand De Morgan’s laws
Perform Boolean algebra using De Morgan’s laws
Simplify a logic circuit/expression using Boolean
algebra
Show understanding of Karnaugh maps (K-map) Understand of the benefits of using Karnaugh maps
Solve logic problems using Karnaugh maps
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 34
--- PAGE 35 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
16 System Software
16.1 Purposes of an Operating System (OS)
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of how an OS can maximise
the use of resources
Describe the ways in which the user interface hides
the complexities of the hardware from the user
Show understanding of process management The concept of multi-tasking and a process
The process states: running, ready and blocked
The need for scheduling and the function and
benefits of different scheduling routines (including
round robin, shortest job first, first come first served,
shortest remaining time)
How the kernel of the OS acts as an interrupt
handler and how interrupt handling is used to
manage low-level scheduling
Show understanding of virtual memory, paging and The concepts of paging, virtual memory and
segmentation for memory management segmentation
The difference between paging and segmentation
How pages can be replaced
How disk thrashing can occur
16.2 Translation Software
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of how an interpreter can
execute programs without producing a translated
version
Show understanding of the various stages in the Including lexical analysis, syntax analysis, code
compilation of a program generation and optimisation
Show understanding of how the grammar of a
language can be expressed using syntax diagrams
or Backus-Naur Form (BNF) notation
Show understanding of how Reverse Polish
Notation (RPN) can be used to carry out the
evaluation of expressions
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 35
--- PAGE 36 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
17 Security
17.1 Encryption, Encryption Protocols and Digital Certificates
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of how encryption works Including the use of public key, private key, plain
text, cipher text, encryption, symmetric key
cryptography and asymmetric key cryptography
How the keys can be used to send a private
message from the public to an individual/
organisation
How the keys can be used to send a verified
message to the public
How data is encrypted and decrypted, using
symmetric and asymmetric cryptography
Purpose, benefits and drawbacks of quantum
cryptography
Show awareness of the Secure Socket Layer (SSL)/ Purpose of SSL / TLS
Transport Layer Security (TLS) Use of SSL/TLS in client-server communication
Situations where the use of SSL/TLS would be
appropriate
Show understanding of digital certification How a digital certificate is acquired
How a digital certificate is used to produce digital
signatures
18 Artificial Intelligence (AI)
18.1 Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of how graphs can be used to Purpose and structure of a graph
aid Artificial Intelligence (AI) Use A* and Dijkstra’s algorithms to perform
searches on a graph
Candidates will not be required to write algorithms
to set up, access, or perform searches on graphs
Show understanding of how artificial neural
networks have helped with machine learning
Show understanding of Deep Learning, Machine Understand machine learning categories, including
Learning and Reinforcement Learning and the supervised learning, unsupervised learning
reasons for using these methods.
Show understanding of back propagation of errors
and regression methods in machine learning
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 36
--- PAGE 37 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
19 Computational thinking and Problem-solving
19.1 Algorithms
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of linear and binary searching Write an algorithm to implement a linear search
methods Write an algorithm to implement a binary search
The conditions necessary for the use of a binary
search
How the performance of a binary search varies
according to the number of data items
Show understanding of insertion sort and bubble Write an algorithm to implement an insertion sort
sort methods Write an algorithm to implement a bubble sort
Performance of a sorting routine may depend on
the initial order of the data and the number of data
items
Show understanding of and use Abstract Data Write algorithms to find an item in each of the
Types (ADT) following: linked list, binary tree
Write algorithms to insert an item into each of the
following: stack, queue, linked list, binary tree
Write algorithms to delete an item from each of the
following: stack, queue, linked list
Show understanding that a graph is an example of
an ADT. Describe the key features of a graph and
justify its use for a given situation. Candidates will
not be required to write code for a graph structure
Show how it is possible for ADTs to be implemented Describe the following ADTs and demonstrate how
from another ADT they can be implemented from appropriate built-
in types or other ADTs: stack, queue, linked list,
dictionary, binary tree
Show understanding that different algorithms which Including use of Big O notation to specify time and
perform the same task can be compared by using space complexity
criteria (e.g. time taken to complete the task and
memory used)
19.2 Recursion
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Show understanding of recursion Essential features of recursion
How recursion is expressed in a programming
language
Write and trace recursive algorithms
When the use of recursion is beneficial
Show awareness of what a compiler has to do to Use of stacks and unwinding
translate recursive programming code
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 37
--- PAGE 38 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
20 Further Programming
20.1 Programming Paradigms
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Understanding what is meant by a programming
paradigm
Show understanding of the characteristics of a Low-level Programming:
number of programming paradigms:
• understanding of and ability to write
• Low-level low-level code that uses various addressing
modes: immediate, direct, indirect, indexed and
relative
• Imperative (Procedural) Imperative (Procedural) programming:
• Assumed knowledge and understanding of
Structural Programming (see details in AS
content section 11.3)
• understanding of and ability to write imperative
(procedural) programming code that uses
variables, constructs, procedures and functions.
See details in AS content
• Object Oriented Object-Oriented Programming (OOP):
• understanding of the terminology associated
with OOP (including objects, properties/
attributes, methods, classes, inheritance,
polymorphism, containment (aggregation),
encapsulation, getters, setters, instances)
• understanding of how to solve a problem by
designing appropriate classes
• understanding of and ability to write code that
demonstrates the use of OOP
• Declarative Declarative programming:
• understanding of and ability to solve a problem
by writing appropriate facts and rules based on
supplied information
• understanding of and ability to write code that
can satisfy a goal using facts and rules
20.2 File Processing and Exception Handling
Candidates should be able to: Notes and guidance
Write code to perform file-processing operations Open (in read, write, append mode) and close a file
Read a record from a file and write a record to a file
Perform file-processing operations on serial,
sequential, random files
Show understanding of an exception and the Know when it is appropriate to use exception
importance of exception handling handling
Write program code to use exception handling
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 38
--- PAGE 39 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Subject content
Teacher guidance
Equipment and facilities
Computer science is a practical subject and the Cambridge AS and A Level syllabus places emphasis on the
use of procedural high-level programming languages. Centres must ensure that their equipment and facilities
are adequate for candidates to be able to satisfy the requirements of the syllabus. The hardware facilities
needed will depend on the number of candidates, but should be sufficient for all candidates to have enough
time to practise their programming skills.
Hardware
Candidates need to have access to a system with direct-access file capability on backing store and hardcopy
facilities.
Software
Candidates should have experience of using a high-level programming language, chosen by the centre, from
the following list:
• Java (console mode)
• Visual Basic (console mode)
• Python (console mode).
Books
The British Computer Society (BCS) book list for schools and colleges are suitable for use as reference.
Teachers will need to consult several books to cover the whole syllabus adequately. There is a suggested book
list on our website.
Practical skills
Computing is a practical subject and a range of practical exercises should supplement the study of most parts
of the syllabus.
It is important that centres encourage candidates, as early as possible in the course, to develop a systematic
approach to practical problem-solving using appropriate resources.
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 39
--- PAGE 40 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026.
4 Details of the assessment
The AS Level will be assessed through two external written papers. Both papers are compulsory.
• Paper 1 – Theory Fundamentals
• Paper 2 – Fundamental Problem-solving and Programming Skills
Paper 1 Theory Fundamentals will assess content described in this syllabus, sections 1 to 8. Candidates
will answer a number of questions, requiring some short and some longer answers. The questions will test
knowledge and understanding of the principles behind computer science as well as the application of these to
solve problems.
Paper 2 Fundamental Problem-solving and Programming Skills will assess content described in this
syllabus, sections 9 to 12. Candidates will answer a number of questions, requiring some short and
some longer answers. The questions will test programming knowledge and skills. Candidates will not
be required to write programming code. Candidates will be provided with an Insert to use in the exam
with pseudocode built-in functions and operators. For more information on the pseudocode please see
www.cambridgeinternational.org/support
The A Level will be examined through four papers, papers 1 and 2 at AS Level plus:
• Paper 3 – Advanced Theory (written paper)
• Paper 4 – Practical
Paper 3 is a written paper and paper 4 is a practical programming paper carried out on a computer. Both
papers are compulsory.
Paper 3 Advanced Theory will assess content described in this syllabus, sections 13 to 20. Candidates will
answer a number of questions, requiring some short and some longer answers.
Paper 4 Practical will assess practical application of content described in the syllabus, sections 19 to 20, except
for low-level and declarative programming. The programming tasks will be based around a small number of
scenarios, candidates will be assessed on their ability to write programs or program elements to solve tasks.
Centres must ensure that all candidates have access to computers that belong to the centre and these must
not have internet access or access to email.
The source files given will not contain binary files.
Please see section 2: Assessment overview.
Submission of Paper 4 Practical
The evidence document supplied by Cambridge International should be saved with the centre number,
candidate’s name and candidate’s number. At each stage in the assessment of Paper 4, candidates will be
asked to copy program listings or take screenshots of results to paste into the evidence document. Candidates
must save their work at regular intervals and centres are recommended to enable the auto save function. If
there is no evidence of work in the evidence document, the work will not receive any marks.
Details of how to administer Paper 4 Practical can be found in the Cambridge Handbook which is available on
our website: www.cambridgeinternational.org/examsofficers
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 40
--- PAGE 41 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Details of the assessment
Command words
Command words and their meanings help candidates know what is expected from them in the exams. The
table below includes command words used in the assessment for this syllabus. The use of the command word
will relate to the subject context.
Command word What it means
Analyse examine in detail to show meaning, identify elements and the relationship between
them
Assess make an informed judgement
Calculate work out from given facts, figures or information
Comment give an informed opinion
Compare identify/comment on similarities and/or differences
Complete add information to an incomplete diagram or table
Consider review and respond to given information
Contrast identify/comment on differences
Define give precise meaning
Demonstrate show how or give an example
Describe state the points of a topic / give characteristics and main features
Develop take forward to a more advanced stage or build upon given information
Discuss write about issue(s) or topic(s) in depth in a structured way
Draw draw a line to match a term with a description
Evaluate judge or calculate the quality, importance, amount, or value of something
Examine investigate closely, in detail
Explain set out purposes or reasons / make the relationships between things clear / say why
and/or how and support with relevant evidence
Give produce an answer from a given source or recall/memory
Identify name/select/recognise
Justify support a case with evidence/argument
Outline set out the main points
Predict suggest what may happen based on available information
Sketch make a simple freehand drawing showing the key features, taking care over
proportions
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 41
--- PAGE 42 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. Details of the assessment
Command Word What it means
State express in clear terms
Suggest apply knowledge and understanding to situations where there are a range of valid
responses in order to make proposals / put forward considerations
Summarise select and present the main points, without detail
Write write an answer in a specific way
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 42
--- PAGE 43 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026.
5 What else you need to know
This section is an overview of other information you need to know about this syllabus. It will help to share the
administrative information with your exams officer so they know when you will need their support. Find more
information about our administrative processes at www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide
Before you start
Previous study
We recommend that learners starting this course should have completed a course in Computer Science
equivalent to Cambridge IGCSE™ or Cambridge O Level.
Guided learning hours
We design Cambridge International AS & A Level syllabuses to require about 180 guided learning hours for
each Cambridge International AS Level and about 360 guided learning hours for a Cambridge International
A Level. The number of hours a learner needs to achieve the qualification may vary according to each school
and the learners’ previous experience of the subject.
Availability and timetables
All Cambridge schools are allocated to an administrative zone. Each zone has a specific timetable.
Find your administrative zone at www.cambridgeinternational.org/adminzone
You can view the timetable for your administrative zone at www.cambridgeinternational.org/timetables
You can enter candidates in the June and November exam series.
Check you are using the syllabus for the year the candidate is taking the exam.
Private candidates can enter for this syllabus provided that the accommodating centre can make appropriate
arrangements to conduct the practical paper. For more information, see the Cambridge Guide to Making
Entries.
Combining with other syllabuses
Candidates can take this syllabus alongside other Cambridge International syllabuses in a single exam series.
The only exceptions are:
• Cambridge International AS & A Level Information and Communication Technology 9626
• syllabuses with the same title at the same level.
Group awards: Cambridge AICE
Cambridge AICE (Advanced International Certificate of Education) is a group award for Cambridge International
AS & A Level. It encourages schools to offer a broad and balanced curriculum by recognising the achievements
of learners who pass exams in a range of different subjects.
Learn more about Cambridge AICE at www.cambridgeinternational.org/aice
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 43
--- PAGE 44 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. What else you need to know
Making entries
Exams officers are responsible for submitting entries to Cambridge International. We encourage them to work
closely with you to make sure they enter the right number of candidates for the right combination of syllabus
components. Entry option codes and instructions for submitting entries are in the Cambridge Guide to Making
Entries. Your exams officer has access to this guide.
Exam administration
To keep our exams secure, we produce question papers for different areas of the world, known as
administrative zones. We allocate all Cambridge schools to one administrative zone determined by their
location. Each zone has a specific timetable.
Some of our syllabuses offer candidates different assessment options. An entry option code is used to identify
the components the candidate will take relevant to the administrative zone and the available assessment
options.
Support for exams officers
We know how important exams officers are to the successful running of exams. We provide them with the
support they need to make entries on time. Your exams officer will find this support, and guidance for all other
phases of the Cambridge Exams Cycle, at www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide
Retakes and carrying forward marks
Candidates can retake Cambridge International AS Level and Cambridge International A Level as many times
as they want to. Information on retake entries is at www.cambridgeinternational.org/retakes
Candidates can carry forward the result of their Cambridge International AS Level assessment from one series
to complete the Cambridge International A Level in a following series. The rules, time limits and regulations
for carry-forward entries for staged assessment and carrying forward component marks can be found in the
Cambridge Handbook for the relevant year of assessment at www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide
To confirm what entry options are available for this syllabus, refer to the Cambridge Guide to Making Entries for
the relevant series.
Language
This syllabus and the related assessment materials are available in English only.
Accessibility and equality
Syllabus and assessment design
At Cambridge International, we work to avoid direct or indirect discrimination in our syllabuses and assessment
materials. We aim to maximise inclusivity for candidates of all national, cultural or social backgrounds and
candidates with protected characteristics, which include special educational needs and disability, religion and
belief, and characteristics related to gender and identity. We also aim to make our materials as accessible as
possible by using accessible language and applying accessible design principles. This gives all candidates the
fairest possible opportunity to demonstrate their knowledge, skills and understanding and helps to minimise the
requirement to make reasonable adjustments during the assessment process.
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 44
--- PAGE 45 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. What else you need to know
Access arrangements
Access arrangements (including modified papers) are the principal way in which Cambridge International
complies with our duty, as guided by the UK Equality Act (2010), to make ‘reasonable adjustments’ for
candidates with special educational needs (SEN), disability, illness or injury. Where a candidate would otherwise
be at a substantial disadvantage in comparison to a candidate with no SEN, disability, illness or injury, we
may be able to agree pre-examination access arrangements. These arrangements help a candidate by
minimising accessibility barriers and maximising their opportunity to demonstrate their knowledge, skills and
understanding in an assessment.
Important:
Requested access arrangements should be based on evidence of the candidate’s barrier to assessment
and should also reflect their normal way of working at school. This is explained in the Cambridge Handbook
www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide
• For Cambridge International to approve an access arrangement, we will need to agree that it constitutes
a reasonable adjustment, involves reasonable cost and timeframe and does not affect the security and
integrity of the assessment.
• Availability of access arrangements should be checked by centres at the start of the course. Details of our
standard access arrangements and modified question papers are available in the Cambridge Handbook
www.cambridgeinternational.org/eoguide
• Please contact us at the start of the course to find out if we are able to approve an arrangement that is not
included in the list of standard access arrangements.
• Candidates who cannot access parts of the assessment may be able to receive an award based on the
parts they have completed.
After the exam
Grading and reporting
Grades a, b, c, d or e indicate the standard a candidate achieved at Cambridge International AS Level. ‘a’ is the
highest and ‘e’ is the lowest grade.
Grades A*, A, B, C, D or E indicate the standard a candidate achieved at Cambridge International A Level. A* is
the highest and E is the lowest grade.
‘Ungraded’ means that the candidate’s performance did not meet the standard required for the lowest grade
(E or e). ‘Ungraded’ is reported on the statement of results but not on the certificate. In specific circumstances
your candidates may see one of the following letters on their statement of results:
• Q (PENDING)
• X (NO RESULT).
These letters do not appear on the certificate.
If a candidate takes a Cambridge International A Level and fails to achieve grade E or higher, a Cambridge
International AS Level grade will be awarded if both of the following apply:
• the components taken for the Cambridge International A Level by the candidate in that series included all
the components making up a Cambridge International AS Level
• the candidate’s performance on the AS Level components was sufficient to merit the award of a Cambridge
International AS Level grade.
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 45
--- PAGE 46 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. What else you need to know
On the statement of results and certificates, Cambridge International AS & A Levels are shown as General
Certificates of Education, GCE Advanced Subsidiary Level (GCE AS Level) and GCE Advanced Level (GCE
A Level).
School feedback: ‘Cambridge International A Levels are the ‘gold standard’ qualification. They
are based on rigorous, academic syllabuses that are accessible to students from a wide range
of abilities yet have the capacity to stretch our most able.’
Feedback from: Director of Studies, Auckland Grammar School, New Zealand
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 46
--- PAGE 47 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. What else you need to know
How students, teachers and higher education can use the grades
Cambridge International A Level
Assessment at Cambridge International A Level has two purposes:
1 to measure learning and achievement
The assessment confirms achievement and performance in relation to the knowledge, understanding and
skills specified in the syllabus.
2 to show likely future success
The outcomes help predict which students are well prepared for a particular course or career and/or which
students are more likely to be successful.
The outcomes help students choose the most suitable course or career
Cambridge International AS Level
Assessment at Cambridge International AS Level has two purposes:
1 to measure learning and achievement
The assessment confirms achievement and performance in relation to the knowledge, understanding and
skills specified in the syllabus.
2 to show likely future success
The outcomes help predict which students are well prepared for a particular course or career and/or which
students are more likely to be successful.
The outcomes help students choose the most suitable course or career
The outcomes help decide whether students part way through a Cambridge International A Level course
are making enough progress to continue
The outcomes guide teaching and learning in the next stages of the Cambridge International A Level
course.
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 47
--- PAGE 48 ---
Cambridge International AS & A Level Computer Science 9618 syllabus for 2026. What else you need to know
Changes to this syllabus for 2026
The syllabus has been updated. This is version 2, published December 2025.
You must read the whole syllabus before planning your teaching programme. We review our
syllabuses regularly to make sure they continue to meet the needs of our schools. In updating this syllabus, we
have made it easier for teachers and students to understand, keeping the familiar features that teachers and
schools value.
Changes to version 2 of the syllabus, published December 2025
Other changes • There is clarification on which papers are to be taken for each level and
the use of calculators on page 11.
• The weblink on page 43 has been updated.
Changes to version 1 of the syllabus, published September 2023
Changes to assessment • For Paper 4, source files given will not contain binary files.
(including changes to
specimen papers)
Significant changes to the syllabus are indicated by black vertical lines either side of the text.
Any textbooks endorsed to support the syllabus for examination from 2021 are still suitable for
use with this syllabus.
Back to contents page www.cambridgeinternational.org/alevel 48
--- PAGE 49 ---
School feedback: ‘While studying Cambridge IGCSE and Cambridge International A Levels, students
broaden their horizons through a global perspective and develop a lasting passion for learning.’
Feedback from: Zhai Xiaoning, Deputy Principal, The High School Affiliated to Renmin University of China
We are committed to making our documents accessible in accordance with the WCAG 2.1 Standard. We are always looking to improve
the accessibility of our documents. If you find any problems or you think we are not meeting accessibility requirements, contact us at
info@cambridgeinternational.org with the subject heading: Digital accessibility. If you need this document in a different format, contact
us and supply your name, email address and requirements and we will respond within 15 working days.
Cambridge Assessment International Education, The Triangle Building, Shaftesbury Road, Cambridge, CB2 8EA, United Kingdom
t : +44 (0)1223 553554 email : info@cambridgeinternational.org www.cambridgeinternational.org
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment September 2023
