Cambridge International AS & A Level
COMPUTER SCIENCE 9618/42
Paper 4 Practical October/November 2025
2 hours 30 minutes
You will need: Candidate source files (listed on page 2)
evidence.doc
INSTRUCTIONS
(cid:404) Carry out every instruction in each task.
(cid:404) Save your work using the file names given in the task as and when instructed.
(cid:404) You must not have access to either the internet or any email system during this examination.
(cid:404) You must save your work in the evidence document as stated in the tasks. If work is not saved in the
evidence document, you will not receive marks for that task.
(cid:404) You must use a high-level programming language from this list:
Java (console mode)
Python (console mode)
Visual Basic (console mode)
(cid:404) A mark of zero will be awarded if a programming language other than those listed here is used.
INFORMATION
(cid:404) The total mark for this paper is 75.
(cid:404) The number of marks for each question or part question is shown in brackets [ ].
This document has 12 pages. Any blank pages are indicated.
[Turn over
*8092536802*
DC (PQ) 343263/2
© UCLES 2025
2
You have been supplied with the following source files:
TreeData.txt
Open the evidence document, evidence.doc
Make sure that your name, centre number and candidate number will appear on every page of this
document. This document must contain your answers to each question.
Save this evidence document in your work area as:
evidence_ followed by your centre number_candidate number, for example: evidence_zz999_9999
A class declaration can be used to declare a record. If the programming language used does not
support arrays, a list can be used instead.
One source file is used to answer Question 3. The file is called TreeData.txt
1 A program stores data about birds using Object-Oriented Programming (OOP).
The class Bird stores the data about the birds:
Bird
DistancePerHour : Real stores the number of kilometres per hour (km/h) the bird
can fly (between 0.0 and 100.0 inclusive)
Species : String stores the species of the bird, for example Pigeon
XPosition : Real stores the current horizontal position of the bird
YPosition : Real stores the current vertical position of the bird
Constructor() initialises Species and DistancePerHour to the
parameter values; initialises XPosition and YPosition
to 500.0
GetPosition() returns a string message that contains the horizontal and
vertical position of the bird
GetSpecies() returns the species of the bird
Move() takes a direction and number of minutes flying (between
0 and 500 inclusive) as parameters and updates the
appropriate horizontal or vertical position
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/O/N/25
3
(a) (i) Write program code to declare the class Bird and its constructor.
Do not declare the other methods.
All attributes should be private.
Use your programming language appropriate constructor.
If you are writing in Python, include attribute declarations using comments.
Save your program as Question1_N25.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(a)(i) in the evidence document.
[4]
(ii) The method GetSpecies() returns the species of the bird.
Write program code for GetSpecies()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(a)(ii) in the evidence document.
[2]
(iii) The method GetPosition() returns a string of the bird’s data in the format:
"X = " & <XPosition> & " Y = " & <YPosition>
An example string for a bird is:
X = 500.0 Y = 250.0
Write program code for GetPosition()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(a)(iii) in the evidence document.
[3]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/O/N/25 [Turn over
4
(iv) If the bird is travelling north, the vertical position increases. If the bird is travelling south,
the vertical position decreases.
If the bird is travelling east, the horizontal position increases. If the bird is travelling west,
the horizontal position decreases.
The method Move():
• takes the direction of travel as a parameter in the form ‘N’ for north, ‘S’ for south,
‘E’ for east or ‘W’ for west
• takes the number of minutes that the bird has been flying (to the nearest minute) as
a parameter
• calculates the distance travelled by the bird using the formula:
distance travelled = (distance per hour / 60) * minutes flying
• updates the vertical or horizontal position using the distance calculated.
You do not need to validate the parameters.
Write program code for Move()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(a)(iv) in the evidence document.
[5]
(b) The main program creates two instances of Bird
The first bird is the species ‘Cockatiel’ and flies 71.0 km/h.
The second bird is the species ‘Macaw’ and flies 56.0 km/h.
Write program code to declare and initialise the two birds.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(b) in the evidence document.
[3]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/O/N/25
5
(c) (i) The main program needs to:
• output a message that includes the species and current X position and Y position for
each bird
• prompt the user to select one of the birds to move and take this as an input
• prompt the user to enter the direction the bird has been travelling and take this as
an input
• prompt the user to enter the time to the nearest minute that the bird has been
travelling and take this as an input
• call the appropriate method to update the chosen bird’s position
• output an update on the bird’s new position.
Each input needs to repeat until valid data is entered. All outputs must be meaningful.
Write program code to amend the main program.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(c)(i) in the evidence document.
[8]
(ii) Test your program four times to meet these criteria:
Test 1: The Cockatiel travels north for 60 minutes.
Test 2: The Macaw travels south for 30 minutes.
Test 3: The Cockatiel travels west for 30 minutes.
Test 4: The Macaw travels east for 60 minutes.
Take a screenshot of the output(s).
Save your program.
Copy and paste the screenshot(s) into part 1(c)(ii) in the evidence document.
[3]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/O/N/25 [Turn over
6
2 A program stores 20 unique random integers between 0 and 100 (inclusive) in a 1D array that is
local to the main program.
(a) Write program code to declare the array local to the main program and store 20 unique
random numbers between 0 and 100 (inclusive) in the array.
Save your program as Question2_N25.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(a) in the evidence document.
[3]
(b) The procedure PrintArray() takes an integer array as a parameter. The procedure outputs
the array contents on a single line with a space between each integer.
Write the program code for PrintArray()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(b) in the evidence document.
[3]
(c) The function BubbleSort():
• takes an integer array as a parameter
• sorts the data into ascending order using a bubble sort
• returns the sorted array.
The function needs to work for an array of any length.
Do not use an inbuilt sorting method.
Write program code for BubbleSort()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(c) in the evidence document.
[5]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/O/N/25
7
(d) (i) The main program:
• outputs the contents of the array using PrintArray()
• sorts the array using BubbleSort()
• outputs "Sorted"
• outputs the contents of the sorted array using PrintArray()
Write program code for the main program.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(d)(i) in the evidence document.
[3]
(ii) Test your program.
Take a screenshot of the output(s).
Save your program.
Copy and paste the screenshot(s) into part 2(d)(ii) in the evidence document.
[1]
(e) The recursive function RecursiveBinarySearch() takes four parameters:
• an integer array
• the lower bound of the array
• the upper bound of the array
• the value to find in the array.
The recursive function performs a binary search to find the index of the value in the array.
The function returns the index of the value if it is found. The function returns –1 if the value is
not found.
Write program code for RecursiveBinarySearch()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(e) in the evidence document.
[6]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/O/N/25 [Turn over
8
(f) (i) The main program:
• prompts the user to enter an integer
• takes the integer as input
• calls RecursiveBinarySearch() with the sorted array, appropriate lower bound,
appropriate upper bound and the user’s input as parameters
• outputs "Not found" if the input is not within the array
• outputs "Found at position" and the index if the input is within the array.
Write program code to amend the main program.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(f)(i) in the evidence document.
[3]
(ii) Test your program three times with each of the inputs described:
Test 1: the smallest number in the array
Test 2: the largest number in the array
Test 3: a number not in the array
Take a screenshot of each output.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the screenshot(s) into part 2(f)(ii) in the evidence document.
[2]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/O/N/25
9
BLANK PAGE
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/O/N/25 [Turn over
10
3 A program stores integers in ascending order in an ordered binary tree. The tree is implemented
as a 2D array.
Each node is stored with three values:
• a pointer to the left node
• the data
• a pointer to the right node.
All null values are stored as –1
The binary tree can store up to 50 nodes.
Nodes cannot be deleted from the binary tree.
(a) The binary tree is stored as a global array with the identifier TreeArray. The left pointer, the
data and the right pointer of each node are initialised to –1
The global variable RootPointer stores the index of the root node in the tree, initialised to
–1
The global variable FreeNode stores the index of the next free node in the array, initialised
to 0
Write program code to declare and initialise TreeArray, RootPointer and FreeNode
Save your program as Question3_N25.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(a) in the evidence document.
[3]
(b) The procedure AddNode():
• takes an integer to store in the binary tree as a parameter
• stores the parameter in the next free node in the array
• finds the position to store the data in the tree by following the appropriate pointers
• updates the pointer of the new node’s parent node.
The procedure outputs "The tree is full" if the parameter cannot be stored because
the tree is full.
Write program code for AddNode()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(b) in the evidence document.
[7]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/O/N/25
11
(c) The text file TreeData.txt stores 50 integers. Each integer is on a new line in the file.
The main program reads each integer from the file and stores each integer in the binary tree
in the order they are read.
Write program code for the main program.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(c) in the evidence document.
[4]
(d) The procedure WriteAllToFile() stores the content of TreeArray in a new text file with
the filename Tree.txt. The file Tree.txt is not provided.
Each node in TreeArray is stored on one line with a comma separating each value.
For example, the current contents of TreeArray are:
Index 0 1 2
0 –1 20 1
1 –1 30 –1
…
49 -1 -1 -1
After writing TreeArray to the text file, Tree.txt will contain:
–1,20,1
–1,30,–1
…
-1,-1,-1
Write program code for WriteAllToFile()
Include exception handling when writing to the file.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(d) in the evidence document.
[5]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/O/N/25 [Turn over
12
(e) (i) Amend the main program to call WriteAllToFile()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(e)(i) in the evidence document.
[1]
(ii) Test your program.
Take a screenshot that shows all of the content stored in the file Tree.txt
In this screenshot you need to make sure the filename is visible.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the screenshot(s) into part 3(e)(ii) in the evidence document.
[1]
Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every
reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the
publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity.
To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge
Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download
at www.cambridgeinternational.org after the live examination series.
Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of Cambridge Assessment. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge
Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is a department of the University of Cambridge.
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/O/N/25
