Cambridge International AS & A Level
This document has 12 pages. Any blank pages are indicated.
[Turn over
*8012187262*
COMPUTER SCIENCE 9618/42
Paper 4 Practical October/November 2022
2 hours 30 minutes
You will need: Candidate source files (listed on page 2)
evidence.doc
INSTRUCTIONS
(cid:404) Carry out every instruction in each task.
(cid:404) Save your work using the file names given in the task as and when instructed.
(cid:404) You must not have access to either the internet or any email system during this examination.
(cid:404) You must save your work in the evidence document as stated in the tasks. If work is not saved in the
evidence document, you will not receive marks for that task.
(cid:404) You must use a high-level programming language from this list:
Java (console mode)
Python (console mode)
Visual Basic (console mode)
(cid:404) A mark of zero will be awarded if a programming language other than those listed here is used.
INFORMATION
(cid:404) The total mark for this paper is 75.
(cid:404) The number of marks for each question or part question is shown in brackets [ ].
DC (PQ) 302757/2
© UCLES 2022
2
Open the evidence document, evidence.doc
Make sure that your name, centre number and candidate number will appear on every page of this
document. This document must contain your answers to each question.
Save this evidence document in your work area as:
evidence_ followed by your centre number_candidate number, for example: evidence_zz999_9999
A class declaration can be used to declare a record.
If the programming language does not support arrays, a list can be used instead.
A source file is used to answer Question 2. The file is called Characters.txt
1 A computer program is needed to store jobs in order of priority. Each job has a job number
(for example, 123) and a priority from 1 to 10, with 1 being the highest priority and 10 the lowest.
The program stores the jobs in a global 2D array.
The pseudocode declaration for the array is:
DECLARE Jobs : ARRAY[0:99, 0:1] OF INTEGER
For example:
• Jobs[0, 0] stores the job number of the first job.
• Jobs[0, 1] stores the priority of the first job.
The global variable, NumberOfJobs, stores the number of jobs currently in the array.
(a) Write program code to declare the global 2D array Jobs and the global variable
NumberOfJobs.
Save your program as Question1_N22.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(a) in the evidence document.
[3]
(b) The procedure Initialise() stores –1 in each of the array elements and assigns 0 to
NumberOfJobs.
Write program code for the procedure Initialise().
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(b) in the evidence document.
[3]
© UCLES 2022 9618/42/O/N/22
3
(c) The procedure AddJob():
• takes a job number and priority as parameters
• stores the job in the next free array element
• outputs ‘Added’ if the job was successfully stored in the array
• outputs ‘Not added’ if the job was not successfully stored in the array.
Write program code for the procedure AddJob().
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(c) in the evidence document.
[5]
(d) The main program should call the procedure Initialise() and then use the AddJob()
procedure to store the following jobs in the order given:
Job number Priority
12 10
526 9
33 8
12 9
78 1
Write program code for the main program and perform the tasks described.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(d) in the evidence document.
[2]
(e) When a new job has been added, the array is sorted into ascending numerical order of priority
using an insertion sort.
Write program code for the procedure InsertionSort() to sort the data into ascending
numerical order of priority.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(e) in the evidence document.
[5]
© UCLES 2022 9618/42/O/N/22 [Turn over
4
(f) The procedure PrintArray() outputs each job number and priority on a line, for example:
123 priority 1
39 priority 3
120 priority 7
Write program code for the procedure PrintArray().
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(f) in the evidence document.
[3]
(g) The main program needs to sort the array and then output the contents of the array.
(i) Amend the main program by writing program code to call procedures InsertionSort()
and PrintArray().
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(g)(i) in the evidence document.
[1]
(ii) Test your program.
Take a screenshot of the output.
Copy and paste the screenshot into part 1(g)(ii) in the evidence document.
[1]
© UCLES 2022 9618/42/O/N/22
5
2 A computer game is being developed. The game has 10 different characters that are all active in
the game.
Part of the game is being written using object-oriented programming.
The class Character stores data about the characters. Each character has a name and the x
coordinate and y coordinate of their current position.
Character
Name : STRING stores the name of the character
XCoordinate : INTEGER stores the x coordinate
YCoordinate : INTEGER stores the y coordinate
Constructor() initialises Name, XCoordinate and YCoordinate from the
values passed as parameters
GetName() returns the name of the character
GetX() returns the x coordinate of the character
GetY() returns the y coordinate of the character
ChangePosition() takes XChange as an integer parameter and adds it to the
x coordinate
takes YChange as an integer parameter and adds it to the
y coordinate
(a) Write program code to declare the class Character and its constructor. Do not write
program code for the other methods.
Use your programming language appropriate constructor.
All attributes must be private. If you are writing in Python, include attribute declarations using
comments.
Save your program as Question2_N22.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(a) in the evidence document.
[4]
(b) Write program code for the three get methods for the class Character.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(b) in the evidence document.
[3]
© UCLES 2022 9618/42/O/N/22 [Turn over
6
(c) Write program code for the method ChangePosition().
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(c) in the evidence document.
[2]
(d) The main program has a 1D array of characters. Each character is stored as an object of type
Character.
The game has a maximum of 10 characters. The character names, x coordinates and y
coordinates are stored in the file Characters.txt in the order:
• name
• x coordinate
• y coordinate.
For example, the first character in the file is named Amal, with the x coordinate 0 and the y
coordinate 2.
Amend the main program by writing program code to:
• declare the array
• read in all 10 characters from Characters.txt
• store each character as an object in the array.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(d) in the evidence document.
[7]
(e) The main program needs to read in a character’s name from the user, search for the character
in the array and store the index of its position. It repeats until the user enters a name that
exists in the array.
Amend the main program by writing program code to perform this task.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(e) in the evidence document.
[5]
© UCLES 2022 9618/42/O/N/22
7
(f) The user will enter a letter to identify the direction the chosen character from part 2(e) should
move.
• If ‘A’ is input, the character moves left (x coordinate minus 1).
• If ‘W’ is input, the character moves up (y coordinate plus 1).
• If ‘S’ is input, the character moves down (y coordinate minus 1).
• If ‘D’ is input, the character moves right (x coordinate plus 1).
Amend the main program by writing program code to:
• take a letter as input until it is a valid move (A, W, S or D)
• change the position of the character using the appropriate method.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(f) in the evidence document.
[7]
(g) (i) When a change to a character’s position has been made, the program needs to output
the character’s name and the new x and y coordinates of the character, in the format:
Qui has changed coordinates to X = 83 and Y = 0
Amend the main program by writing program code to perform these tasks.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(g)(i) in the evidence document.
[2]
(ii) Test your program by inputting the following four items of data in the order given:
THOMAS
qui
X
A
Take a screenshot of the output.
Copy and paste the screenshot into part 2(g)(ii) in the evidence document.
[1]
© UCLES 2022 9618/42/O/N/22 [Turn over
8
3 A program uses a linear queue to store up to 100 integers.
(a) A 1D array, Queue, is used to store the data. The head pointer points to the first number
stored in the queue and the tail pointer points to the next free space in the queue.
Write program code to:
• declare the global array Queue
• declare the global variable head pointer and assign an appropriate initial value
• declare the global variable tail pointer and assign an appropriate initial value.
Save your program as Question3_N22.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(a) in the evidence document.
[3]
(b) The function Enqueue() takes an integer value as a parameter and stores it in the queue. It
returns TRUE if the value was successfully stored and FALSE otherwise.
Write program code for the function Enqueue().
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(b) in the evidence document.
[6]
(c) The main program uses the Enqueue() function to store the numbers 1 to 20 (inclusive)
in the queue, in ascending numerical order. The program should output ‘Successful’ if all
numbers are successfully enqueued, and ‘Unsuccessful’ otherwise.
Amend the main program by writing program code to perform this task.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(c) in the evidence document.
[4]
© UCLES 2022 9618/42/O/N/22
9
(d) The following iterative pseudocode function calculates the total of all the values stored in the
queue.
FUNCTION IterativeOutput(Start: INTEGER) RETURNS INTEGER
DECLARE Total : INTEGER
(cid:312)
Total 0
(cid:312)
FOR Count Start - 1 TO HeadPointer STEP -1
(cid:312)
Total Total + Queue[Count]
NEXT Count
RETURN Total
ENDFUNCTION
Rewrite the function as a recursive function using program code.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(d) in the evidence document.
[6]
(e) The main program calls the recursive function from part 3(d) and outputs the value returned.
(i) Amend the main program by writing program code to perform this task.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(e)(i) in the evidence document.
[1]
(ii) Test your program.
Take a screenshot to show the output.
Copy and paste the screenshot into part 3(e)(ii) in the evidence document.
[1]
© UCLES 2022 9618/42/O/N/22
10
BLANK PAGE
© UCLES 2022 9618/42/O/N/22
11
BLANK PAGE
© UCLES 2022 9618/42/O/N/22
12
BLANK PAGE
Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every
reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the
publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity.
To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge
Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download
at www.cambridgeinternational.org after the live examination series.
Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of Cambridge Assessment. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge
Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is a department of the University of Cambridge.
© UCLES 2022 9618/42/O/N/22
