Cambridge International AS & A Level
This document has 12 pages.
[Turn over
*0177211580*
COMPUTER SCIENCE 9618/42
Paper 4 Practical May/June 2025
2 hours 30 minutes
You will need: Candidate source files (listed on page 2)
evidence.doc
INSTRUCTIONS
(cid:404) Carry out every instruction in each task.
(cid:404) Save your work using the file names given in the task as and when instructed.
(cid:404) You must not have access to either the internet or any email system during this examination.
(cid:404) You must save your work in the evidence document as stated in the tasks. If work is not saved in the
evidence document, you will not receive marks for that task.
(cid:404) You must use a high-level programming language from this list:
Java (console mode)
Python (console mode)
Visual Basic (console mode)
(cid:404) A mark of zero will be awarded if a programming language other than those listed here is used.
INFORMATION
(cid:404) The total mark for this paper is 75.
(cid:404) The number of marks for each question or part question is shown in brackets [ ].
DC (DE) 342931/2
© UCLES 2025
2
You have been supplied with the following source files:
StackData.txt
SecondStack.txt
HashData.txt
Open the evidence document, evidence.doc
Make sure that your name, centre number and candidate number will appear on every page of this
document. This document must contain your answers to each question.
Save this evidence document in your work area as:
evidence_ followed by your centre number_candidate number, for example: evidence_zz999_9999
A class declaration can be used to declare a record. If the programming language used does not
support arrays, a list can be used instead.
Three source files are used to answer Questions 1 and 2. The files are called StackData.txt,
SecondStack.txt and HashData.txt
1 A program reads data from a text file and stores it in a stack. The stack Stack is stored as a 1D
array of up to 20 elements. The pointer TopOfStack stores the index of the last element stored in
the stack.
(a) Stack is a global array of strings with all elements initialised to "-1"
TopOfStack is a global variable initialised to –1
Write program code to declare and initialise Stack and TopOfStack
Save your program as Question1_J25.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(a) in the evidence document.
[2]
(b) The function Push() takes a string parameter and attempts to store it on the stack.
The function returns –1 if the stack is full.
The function returns 1 if the parameter is successfully pushed onto the stack.
Write program code for Push()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(b) in the evidence document.
[4]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/M/J/25
3
(c) The function Pop() returns the next item from the stack.
The function returns "–1" if the stack is empty.
Write program code for Pop()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(c) in the evidence document.
[4]
(d) The text file StackData.txt stores numbers and mathematical operators. Each number
and operator are on a new line in the text file.
The mathematical operators used in this program are:
mathematical
meaning
operator
+ addition
– subtraction
/ division
* multiplication
^ power of
The procedure ReadData():
• takes a string filename as a parameter
• opens the file and reads in each line of data
• uses the Push() function to insert each line of data onto the stack
• outputs "Stack full" if any data cannot be stored on the stack because the stack is
full
• uses exception handling when opening and reading from the text file.
The procedure needs to work for a file that contains an unknown number of lines.
Write program code for ReadData()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(d) in the evidence document.
[6]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/M/J/25 [Turn over
4
(e) The values stored in the stack are used to perform mathematical operations.
A total is initialised to the first value in the stack. The first value in the stack will always be a
number.
The next value will be a mathematical operator and the next value will be the number to apply
to the calculation. This is repeated until there are no values left in the stack. There will always
be a number following a mathematical operator.
For example, the contents of a stack are:
10 TopOfStack
+
3
–
2
The total is initialised to the first value in the stack: 10
total = 10
The next two values are: + 3
total = 10 + 3 = 13
The next two values are: – 2
total = 13 – 2 = 11
The final total is 11 and this is returned.
Write program code for the function Calculate() to:
• take each value from the stack
• calculate and return the final total.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(e) in the evidence document.
[7]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/M/J/25
5
(f) (i) Write program code to extend the main program to:
• take a filename as input from the user
• call ReadData() with the input filename
• call Calculate()
• output the final total.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(f)(i) in the evidence document.
[2]
(ii) Test your program twice with the file names:
StackData.txt
SecondStack.txt
Take a screenshot of the output(s).
Save your program.
Copy and paste the screenshot into part 1(f)(ii) in the evidence document.
[2]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/M/J/25 [Turn over
6
2 A program stores data in a 1D array of records, HashTable. The array has space for 200 records.
Each data item is stored in a specific index of the array that is calculated using an algorithm. The
index is calculated from the key field using the formula: Key MOD 200
If two key fields generate the same index, there is a collision. Any records that have a collision
are stored in a second array, Spare. This array has space for 100 records. When a collision is
detected, the record is stored in the next free space in Spare.
(a) The pseudocode record format is:
TYPE NewRecord
DECLARE Key : INTEGER
DECLARE Item1 : INTEGER
DECLARE Item2 : INTEGER
ENDTYPE
Write program code to declare the record type NewRecord
If your chosen programming language does not support record formats, a class can be used
instead.
Save your program as Question2_J25.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(a) in the evidence document.
[2]
(b) (i) Write program code to declare the global arrays HashTable and Spare
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(b)(i) in the evidence document.
[1]
(ii) An empty record has the integer –1 stored in each field.
The procedure Initialise() stores an empty record in each element in HashTable
and Spare
Write program code for Initialise()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(b)(ii) in the evidence document.
[2]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/M/J/25
7
(c) The hash value is calculated from the key field using the formula: Key MOD 200
The function CalculateHash() takes a key field as a parameter and calculates and returns
the hash value for the key field.
Write program code for CalculateHash()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(c) in the evidence document.
[2]
(d) The procedure InsertIntoHash():
• takes a record of type NewRecord as a parameter
• uses CalculateHash() to calculate the hash value for the key field in the record
• checks if the hash value index in HashTable currently stores an empty record
(cid:380) if the index stores an empty record, store the parameter in this index
(cid:380) if the index does not store an empty record, store the parameter in Spare
You can assume there will always be enough space in Spare to store any collisions.
Write program code for InsertIntoHash()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(d) in the evidence document.
[6]
(e) The text file HashData.txt stores up to 200 rows of data to be stored into the hash table.
Each row contains three integer numbers separated by commas.
The first number is the key field, the second number is item 1 and the third number is item 2.
For example:
The first row in the text file contains: 646, 12, 568
The key field is 646, item 1 is 12 and item 2 is 568
The procedure CreateHashTable():
• opens the file HashData.txt
• creates a record for each row of data in the file
• calls InsertIntoHash() with each record.
Write program code for CreateHashTable()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(e) in the evidence document.
[5]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/M/J/25 [Turn over
8
(f) (i) The procedure PrintSpare() outputs the key field of each element in the array Spare
that does not contain an empty record.
Write program code for PrintSpare()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(f)(i) in the evidence document.
[2]
(ii) The main program should call the procedure to initialise the arrays, call the procedure
to create the hash table and then call the procedure to output the contents of the array
Spare
Write program code for the main program.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(f)(ii) in the evidence document.
[1]
(iii) Test your program.
Take a screenshot of the output(s).
Save your program.
Copy and paste the screenshot into part 2(f)(iii) in the evidence document.
[1]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/M/J/25
9
3 A program stores data about animals using Object-Oriented Programming (OOP).
The class Animal stores the data about animals.
Animal
Name : String stores the name of the animal
Sound : String stores the sound the animal makes
Size : Integer stores the size of the animal as an integer between 1 (smallest)
and 10 (largest)
Intelligence : Integer stores the intelligence of the animal as an integer between 1 (least)
and 10 (most)
Constructor() initialises all attributes to its parameter values
Description() returns a string message that contains the data from the attributes
(a) (i) Write program code to declare the class Animal and its constructor.
Do not declare the other methods.
Use your programming language appropriate constructor.
If you are writing in Python, include attribute declarations using comments.
Save your program as Question3_J25.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(a)(i) in the evidence document.
[4]
(ii) The method Description() creates and returns a string of the animal’s data in the
format:
"The animal's name is " <Name> ", it makes a " <Sound> ", its size
is " <Size> " and its intelligence level is " <Intelligence>
For example:
The animal's name is Teddy, it makes a Bark, its size is 4 and its
intelligence level is 6
Write program code for Description()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(a)(ii) in the evidence document.
[3]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/M/J/25 [Turn over
10
(b) The class Parrot inherits from the class Animal
Parrot inherits the attributes from Animal and overrides the Description() method. The
additional attributes and methods in the class Parrot are:
Parrot
WingSpan : Integer the width of the parrot’s wings to the nearest cm
NumberWords : Integer the number of words the parrot can speak
Constructor() calls the parent constructor using its parameter values;
initialises WingSpan and NumberWords to its parameter values
ChangeNumberWords() takes an integer parameter and adds this to the number currently
in NumberWords
(i) Write program code to declare the class Parrot, its constructor and the method
ChangeNumberWords()
Use your programming language appropriate constructor.
If you are writing in Python, include attribute declarations using comments.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(b)(i) in the evidence document.
[4]
(ii) The method Description() in the class Parrot creates and returns a string of the
animal’s data in the format:
"The animal's name is " <Name> ", it makes a " <Sound> ", its size
is " <Size> " and its intelligence level is " <Intelligence> ". It
has a wingspan of " <WingSpan> "cm and can say " <NumberWords> "
words."
For example:
The animal's name is Chewie, it makes a Squawk, its size is 1 and
its intelligence level is 10. It has a wingspan of 30cm and can
say 29 words.
Write program code for Description()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(b)(ii) in the evidence document.
[2]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/M/J/25
11
(c) The class Wolf inherits from the class Animal
Wolf inherits the attributes from Animal and overrides the Description() method. The
additional attributes and methods in the class Wolf are:
Wolf
TerritorySize : Integer stores the size of the area where the wolf lives, to the nearest
square mile
Constructor() calls the parent constructor using its parameter values;
initialises TerritorySize to its parameter value
SetTerritorySize() takes an integer parameter and adds this to the number currently
in TerritorySize
(i) Write program code to declare the class Wolf, its constructor and the method
SetTerritorySize()
Use your programming language appropriate constructor.
If you are writing in Python, include attribute declarations using comments.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(c)(i) in the evidence document.
[4]
(ii) The method Description() in the class Wolf creates and returns a string of the
animal’s data in the format:
"The animal's name is " <Name> ", it makes a " <Sound> ", its size
is " <Size> " and its intelligence level is " <Intelligence> ".
Its territory is " <TerritorySize> " square miles."
For example:
The animal's name is Nighteyes, it makes a Howl, its size is 8 and
its intelligence level is 7. Its territory is 100 square miles.
Write program code for Description()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(c)(ii) in the evidence document.
[2]
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/M/J/25 [Turn over
12
(d) (i) The main program declares instances of the classes for three animals:
• A parrot with the name ‘Chewie’; it makes a ‘Squawk’ sound. Its size is 1, intelligence
is 10, wingspan is 30 cm and it can say 29 words.
• A wolf with the name ‘Nighteyes’; it makes a ‘Howl’ sound. Its size is 8, intelligence
is 7 and its territory is 100 square miles.
• An animal that is a horse with the name ‘Copper’; it makes a ‘Neigh’ sound. Its size
is 10 and its intelligence is 6.
Write program code for the main program.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(d)(i) in the evidence document.
[2]
(ii) The main program also needs to:
• decrease the territory for the wolf Nighteyes by 20 square miles
• increase the number of words the parrot Chewie can say by 2 words
• output the description for all three animals.
Write program code to extend the main program.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(d)(ii) in the evidence document.
[3]
(iii) Test your program.
Take a screenshot of the output(s).
Save your program.
Copy and paste the screenshot into part 3(d)(iii) in the evidence document.
[2]
Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every
reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the
publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity.
To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge
Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download
at www.cambridgeinternational.org after the live examination series.
Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of Cambridge Assessment. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge
Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is a department of the University of Cambridge.
© UCLES 2025 9618/42/M/J/25
