Cambridge International AS & A Level
COMPUTER SCIENCE 9618/41
Paper 4 Practical October/November 2025
2 hours 30 minutes
You will need: Candidate source files (listed on page 2)
evidence.doc
INSTRUCTIONS
(cid:404) Carry out every instruction in each task.
(cid:404) Save your work using the file names given in the task as and when instructed.
(cid:404) You must not have access to either the internet or any email system during this examination.
(cid:404) You must save your work in the evidence document as stated in the tasks. If work is not saved in the
evidence document, you will not receive marks for that task.
(cid:404) You must use a high-level programming language from this list:
Java (console mode)
Python (console mode)
Visual Basic (console mode)
(cid:404) A mark of zero will be awarded if a programming language other than those listed here is used.
INFORMATION
(cid:404) The total mark for this paper is 75.
(cid:404) The number of marks for each question or part question is shown in brackets [ ].
This document has 12 pages.
[Turn over
*3777351582*
DC (SL) 343264/2
© UCLES 2025
2
You have been supplied with the following source files:
HashTableData.txt
Open the evidence document, evidence.doc
Make sure that your name, centre number and candidate number will appear on every page of this
document. This document must contain your answers to each question.
Save this evidence document in your work area as:
evidence_ followed by your centre number_candidate number, for example: evidence_zz999_9999
A class declaration can be used to declare a record. If the programming language used does not
support arrays, a list can be used instead.
One source file is used to answer Question 3. The file is called HashTableData.txt
1 A program stores integers in a stack. The stack is represented as a 1D array of 30 elements with
the identifier Stack
The global pointer TopOfStack stores the index of the last element inserted into the stack.
TopOfStack is initialised to –1
(a) Write program code to declare Stack, initialise each element in the array with a null value
and declare and initialise TopOfStack
Save your program as Question1_N25.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(a) in the evidence document.
[2]
(b) The function Push() takes an integer parameter. If the stack is full, the function returns
FALSE. If the stack is not full, the parameter is inserted into the stack, the pointer is updated
and the function returns TRUE
Write the program code for Push()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(b) in the evidence document.
[4]
© UCLES 2025 9618/41/O/N/25
3
(c) The function Pop() returns the next integer in the stack and updates the pointer as
appropriate. If there is no data in the stack, the function returns the value –999
Write program code for Pop()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(c) in the evidence document.
[4]
(d) The main program generates 40 random integers between 0 and 1000 (inclusive) and attempts
to insert each one into the stack using the appropriate function. If the return value from the
function call indicates the stack is full, no more integers are generated and "Stack full" is
output.
Write program code for the main program.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(d) in the evidence document.
[4]
(e) The procedure FindValues():
• pops each integer from the stack until the stack is empty
• finds and outputs the largest number that was in the stack in an appropriate message
• finds and outputs the smallest number that was in the stack in an appropriate message.
Write program code for FindValues()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(e) in the evidence document.
[4]
(f) (i) Extend the main program to call FindValues()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 1(f)(i) in the evidence document.
[1]
(ii) Test your program.
Take a screenshot of the output(s).
Save your program.
Copy and paste the screenshot(s) into part 1(f)(ii) in the evidence document.
[1]
© UCLES 2025 9618/41/O/N/25 [Turn over
4
2 A program stores data about trains and train stations using Object-Oriented Programming (OOP).
The class Train stores the data about the trains:
Train
TrainIDNumber : String stores the train ID number
Route : Integer stores the route number the train is travelling
Constructor() initialises TrainIDNumber and Route to the parameter
values
GetTrainIDNumber() returns the train ID number
GetRoute() returns the route number the train is travelling
(a) (i) Write program code to declare the class Train and its constructor.
Do not declare the other methods.
All attributes should be private.
Use your programming language appropriate constructor.
If you are writing in Python, include attribute declarations using comments.
Save your program as Question2_N25.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(a)(i) in the evidence document.
[4]
(ii) The methods GetTrainIDNumber() and GetRoute() return the appropriate attribute.
Write program code for GetTrainIDNumber() and GetRoute()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(a)(ii) in the evidence document.
[3]
© UCLES 2025 9618/41/O/N/25
5
(b) The program is tested with four trains:
train ID number route
12ADV 134
33ART 20
9FKF 3
21VBC 24
Write program code to declare an instance of Train for each of the four trains.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(b) in the evidence document.
[2]
© UCLES 2025 9618/41/O/N/25 [Turn over
6
(c) The class Station stores the data about the stations:
Station
StationID : String stores the station ID
NumberPlatforms : Integer stores the number of platforms at the station
Trains[0:9] : Train stores the trains currently at the station platforms
NumberTrains : Integer stores the number of trains currently at the station
platforms
Constructor() initialises StationID and NumberPlatforms
to the parameter values, initialises Trains to an
empty array and NumberTrains to 0
GetTrains() returns a string containing data about the trains
currently at the station platforms
AddTrain() takes a Train parameter and stores it if there is a
platform available; each platform can only have one
train
(i) Write program code to declare the class Station and its constructor.
Do not declare the other methods.
All attributes should be private.
Use your programming language appropriate constructor.
If you are writing in Python, include attribute declarations using comments.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(c)(i) in the evidence document.
[3]
© UCLES 2025 9618/41/O/N/25
7
(ii) The method AddTrain() takes a Train parameter. The method compares the
attributes NumberTrains and NumberPlatforms to identify if there is a platform
available (a platform currently with no train).
The method returns FALSE if there are no platforms available.
If there is a platform available, the method:
• stores the Train parameter in the array Trains
• updates the appropriate attribute(s)
• returns TRUE
Write program code for AddTrain()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(c)(ii) in the evidence document.
[4]
(iii) The method GetTrains() returns the string "There are no trains" if there are no
trains at the station platforms.
If there are trains at the station platforms, the method returns a string in the format:
The trains at station <StationID> are:
<TrainIDNumber> on route number <Route>
The line <TrainIDNumber> on route number <Route> is repeated for each train
at the station platforms.
For example: If the station with the station ID "NT1" has two trains with the train ID
numbers "48RTG", "6UFH", the method will produce this output:
The trains at station NT1 are:
48RTG on route number 43
6UFH on route number 12
Write program code for GetTrains()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(c)(iii) in the evidence document.
[6]
© UCLES 2025 9618/41/O/N/25 [Turn over
8
(d) The program is tested with two stations:
number of
station ID
platforms
STH 2
NTH 1
(i) Write program code to amend the main program to declare an instance of Station for
each of the two stations.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(d)(i) in the evidence document.
[2]
(ii) The four trains attempt to stop at the following stations in the order given:
• Train 12ADV, station STH
• Train 33ART, station STH
• Train 9FKF, station STH
• Train 21VBC, station NTH
Write program code to amend the main program to:
• add each train to the given station using AddTrain()
• output "Station is full" for any train where the return value indicates it cannot
be added to the station
• output the trains at each station using GetTrains()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 2(d)(ii) in the evidence document.
[4]
(iii) Test your program.
Take a screenshot of the output(s).
Save your program.
Copy and paste the screenshot(s) into part 2(d)(iii) in the evidence document.
[2]
© UCLES 2025 9618/41/O/N/25
9
3 A program stores records in the 2D array HashTable. Each record is stored at a specific index of
the array that is calculated using a hashing algorithm with the record’s key field.
The array has 100 (cid:41) 10 elements. The hashing algorithm uses the key to generate an index
between 0 and 99 (inclusive). If two key fields generate the same index, there is a collision. Any
records that have a collision are stored in the next space in the same index.
For example: In this table two record keys generated the same hash value of 1. Four record keys
generated the same hash value of 3.
Index 0 1 2 3 4 5 … 9
0 record
1 record record
2
3 record record record record
4
…
99
The program uses Object-Oriented Programming (OOP).
(a) The class Record stores data about the records:
Record
Key : Integer stores the integer key field for the data
Data : String stores the string data
Constructor() initialises Key and Data to its parameter values
The attributes Key and Data are public.
Write program code to declare the class Record and its constructor.
Use your programming language appropriate constructor.
Save your program as Question3_N25.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(a) in the evidence document.
[2]
© UCLES 2025 9618/41/O/N/25 [Turn over
10
(b) The procedure InitialiseHashTable() initialises each element in the array to an empty
or null record.
Write program code to declare the global 2D array HashTable and the procedure
InitialiseHashTable()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(b) in the evidence document.
[2]
(c) The function Hash():
• takes an integer key field as a parameter
• calculates and returns the hash value of the key field.
The hash value is the result from the formula: key MOD 100
Write program code for Hash()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(c) in the evidence document.
[2]
(d) The procedure InsertData():
• takes an object of type Record as a parameter
• calculates the hash value for the parameter using the appropriate function
• stores the parameter in the correct position in HashTable
You can assume there will be no more than 10 objects that generate the same hash value.
Write program code for InsertData()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(d) in the evidence document.
[4]
© UCLES 2025 9618/41/O/N/25
11
(e) The file "HashTableData.txt" stores 200 key values and string data items in the format:
key,string
For example, the first row in the text file is:
528,permission
The key is 528 and the string data is "permission"
The procedure ReadData():
• opens the text file and reads each line
• splits each line into the key and data
• calls InsertData() with an object containing each key and matching data.
Write program code for ReadData()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(e) in the evidence document.
[5]
(f) The function GetRecord():
• takes an integer key field as a parameter
• calculates the hash value for the key field using the appropriate function
• searches the hash table for the record with the matching key field
• returns the data for the record if the record is found
• returns "Not found" if the record is not found.
Write program code for GetRecord()
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(f) in the evidence document.
[5]
© UCLES 2025 9618/41/O/N/25 [Turn over
12
(g) The main program:
• calls InitialiseHashTable() and ReadData()
• takes five integer key fields as input from the user
• calls GetRecord() with each input and outputs the return value.
(i) Write program code for the main program.
Save your program.
Copy and paste the program code into part 3(g)(i) in the evidence document.
[3]
(ii) Test your program with the following five inputs in the order given:
528
1128
1828
1062
39
Take a screenshot of the output(s).
Save your program.
Copy and paste the screenshot(s) into part 3(g)(ii) in the evidence document.
[2]
Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible. Every
reasonable effort has been made by the publisher (UCLES) to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the
publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity.
To avoid the issue of disclosure of answer-related information to candidates, all copyright acknowledgements are reproduced online in the Cambridge
Assessment International Education Copyright Acknowledgements Booklet. This is produced for each series of examinations and is freely available to download
at www.cambridgeinternational.org after the live examination series.
Cambridge Assessment International Education is part of Cambridge Assessment. Cambridge Assessment is the brand name of the University of Cambridge
Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES), which is a department of the University of Cambridge.
© UCLES 2025 9618/41/O/N/25
